On October 26, 1553,
Michael Servetus was convicted of heresy
and sentenced to death by burning.
The following day, he was chained
to a post in the city of Geneva.
Around his feet were placed
piles of wood ready to be lit.
What was his crime?
Servetus loved Bible truth
and was unable to reconcile
the teachings of the church
with his own studies of the Bible.
Michael Servetus died slowly,
yet never once did he recant
his faith in the Bible
as the Word of God.
This was by no means
the first time fire had been used
to dissuade
or destroy individuals
who loved
the Bible and its teachings.
Throughout history,
the Bible
has faced repeated attacks.
Empires have tried
to destroy it;
religious leaders
have tried to hide it.
But despite opposition
and the threat of death,
many have risked their lives
and reputations to protect it.
The Bible was completed
around the year 98 C.E.
At this point,
most, if not all,
Christians lived in territory
controlled by the Roman Empire.
Roman Emperor Diocletian
began ruling in 284 C.E.
Dr. Peter Williams
works at Tyndale House,
a center for biblical studies.
Rome didn’t have much time for people
who didn’t like the Roman religion.
Diocletian instigated a persecution
—a systematic persecution of the Christians.
Probably the most systematic persecution
that any Roman emperor
ever undertook.
He also was very much against
the Christian books,
so he wanted
to get rid of peoples’ Bibles
and copies of books
of the Bible.
There’s a serious attempt
to destroy Christianity if possible.
Given such extreme opposition,
the survival of the Bible and Christianity
might have seemed impossible.
How did the Bible writings
survive this intense opposition?
Here in Dublin we will begin
to find the answer.
I’m meeting Jessica Baldwin,
the Head of Collections
at the Chester Beatty Library.
The Chester Beatty Library
houses three important papyri
known as P45, P46, and P47.
It’s believed that these papyri
date back to the third century C.E.,
making them some
of the oldest known manuscripts
of the New Testament.
This is Chester Beatty’s
Biblical Papyrus No. 2,
which is also known as P46,
and it’s the earliest surviving copy
of the Pauline Epistles.
The term “papyrus”
is used quite extensively,
but when you look
at the manuscripts,
you can actually see
the material that they’re made of.
So papyrus is made
from the pith of the papyrus plant,
and it was made in Egypt.
This is interesting
because it appears there’s—
Is that a fold that’s
down the middle of that?
These were large manuscripts;
they were substantial;
they weren’t single scrolls
that were rolled and unrolled.
For a scholar
and for the community at the time
which these texts
would have been so vital to,
to have it in a codex form
which you could almost
—you could turn to the section
that you want to refer to.
You could really use it as a text
to be read, thought about, understood.
Professor McGing showed me
these manuscripts
in further detail.
These are real gold-standard texts.
They clearly are
the four Gospels together and Acts.
The letters are
all separated out beautifully.
It was smooth, elegant lines
neatly arrayed.
That in itself is, I suppose,
a tribute to the faith
of the people doing it.
This was a task that was important
—it was important to do properly,
accurately, and beautifully.
These have survived
because they were contained
within a ceramic pot and buried.
These were clearly,
carefully tended for;
they couldn’t really survive
in this form otherwise.
Whoever it was
that protected these manuscripts
showed that they loved the Bible.
As the centuries passed,
the Bible faced new challenges.
William Tyndale
was the first person to seek
to translate the Bible
from the original languages
into English.
Tyndale was born
in the late 15th century.
He was born
in the area of Gloucestershire
but had a chance to go to Oxford
and became a priest.
In the 15th century,
there was a lot of resistance
—the idea that the Word of God
could just simply be accessible
by the general people.
People knew the Latin Bible from church,
which was interpreted by the priest for them.
They never had direct access
to the Bible themselves.
Tyndale was not allowed
to do this translation in England.
He went to the Bishop of London
asking for his permission
to translate the New Testament
from the Greek
—the original text—
into English
but was not given that permission.
Such was the opposition
to Bible translation
that Tyndale later wrote
that there was
no place to do it in all England.
And so with the help of merchants
sympathetic to his cause,
Tyndale fled to Germany
where he could more easily work
on his English translation
of the New Testament.
By 1525,
his translation was complete
and ready to be printed.
The British Library in London
holds the answer
to what happened next.
Dr. Karen Limper-Herz,
a lead curator at the library,
is going to help us find out.
So we are looking
at a unique copy of the first edition
of Tyndale’s New Testament,
printed in Cologne in 1525.
The Cologne Fragment
is the only known copy
of what exists of Tyndale’s first edition
of the New Testament.
The fact that it is a fragment
shows that it was a dangerous thing to do.
The printer had too much to drink
and mentioned that he
was printing
this pro-Lutheran English New Testament
for somebody
called William Tyndale.
The authorities found out about it,
and the print shop was raided.
Tyndale and his partners ran
—and this is all that survives today—
and they went down the Rhine
a bit further to Worms.
So the fact that they didn’t get much further
than part way through Matthew
is quite indicative
of how dangerous it was.
The first complete copies
of Tyndale’s translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures
were finally printed
in the city of Worms in Germany
in 1526.
Around 3,000 or more
of these books were produced.
After leaving Germany,
Tyndale moved to Antwerp.
This bustling city was ideal for Tyndale.
It had a thriving printing industry
and its busy port
made it easy for his books
to reach readers in England.
Professor Guido Latré
has kindly offered to show me
around the very streets that Tyndale
would have walked himself
some 500 years ago.
What he saw around him here
were ordinary people
having access
to the Bible in Dutch.
He wanted the same
for his own folk in England.
If you wanted to smuggle Bibles
on a large scale into England,
this was Northern Europe’s
biggest seaport.
You can’t easily smuggle
a big volume and a big format.
So tiny loose leaves
that were taken to places like this
—these underground cellars,
the warehouses—
and between the leaves
of larger books
that were not forbidden,
the tiny leaves of Tyndale’s translation
would have been hidden.
In London,
someone would have recognized:
‘Aha!
These are the stacks that are marked.
‘I must have a look at these
and find the loose leaves
of Tyndale’s Bible.’
There were about 30,000 copies
of Tyndale’s Bible available
by the end of his life.
This was a brave man
and a big man in terms of courage
and in terms of investment of time.
And the risks he took
are not to be underestimated.
William Tyndale was imprisoned
here in Vilvoorde, just north of Brussels.
As he languished
in prison for over a year,
he no doubt contemplated the cruel death
that inevitably awaited him.
Tyndale is often renowned
for his influence on the English language,
but his work was more than
that of just scholarly ambition.
Tyndale loved the Bible.
Maybe it can be said of him
that he shared the feelings of the psalmist
who spoke of God’s Word
and said:
“How I do love your law!”
As news of Tyndale’s death
spread throughout Europe,
it no doubt concerned
other truth seekers
who were making
their own studies of the Bible.
One such man
was Michael Servetus,
whom we mentioned
at the outset.
He was born here,
in the Aragon region of Northern Spain.
We have traveled to Villanueva de Sijena
to find out more about him.
Sergio Baches is the director
of the Michael Servetus Institute,
which runs a museum in the house
where it is believed Servetus was raised.
We have a young man
who is exposed
to the main religious problems
at that time that influenced
his future thoughts
about some of the tricky issues
related to Christianity,
such as, for instance,
the dogma of the Holy Trinity.
So he wanted to go to the sources.
And that’s what Servetus thought:
The truth must be found in the Bible.
Doctor Marian Hillar
has published work on Michael Servetus.
He was sent,
probably upon the advice of his father,
to Toulouse to study the law.
In Toulouse,
which was a very restrictive place
where reading of the Bible
was forbidden,
he got involved
in serious studies of the Bible.
He had intellectual curiosity.
At that time,
the main issue which people
were really discussing in the streets
and everywhere was religion.
In 1531,
Servetus published his first book
entitled On the Errors of the Trinity.
In his book, he questioned
the teachings of the church
regarding the identity
of God and Jesus.
He later wrote:
“In the Bible,
“there is no mention of the Trinity.
“We get to know God,
“not through
our proud philosophical concepts,
but through Christ.”
In his writings,
Servetus quoted from or alluded to
at least 52 of the 66 books of the Bible.
It’s clear that Michael Servetus
was a man who valued
the teachings
of the Bible above all others.
Servetus was arrested
and was accused of heresy.
It’s a crystal clear example
of cruelty and religious bigotry.
It was expressed
that he has to be punished.
And at that time, the only punishment
which you could imagine was death.
I guess his driving force
was the search of truth,
the need to restore
Christianity to its origins.
Although various views
on Servetus’ conclusions have been raised,
it’s clear he was driven
by a sincere thirst for Biblical truth.
He wrote:
“A book has been given us from heaven,
so that in it we may search after God.”
History is full of accounts of those
who have risked and given their lives
to read, to translate,
or to understand the Bible.
Their overriding motivation
must surely have been
the value they placed on the Bible.
The Bible has come to us
through great opposition.
It has survived physical destruction.
The simple act of translating it
has been outlawed
and those who have strived
to read and understand it
have often been
punished with death.
And yet,
the Bible and the wisdom in it
survives to this day,
a faithful transmission
of the original writers’ words.
No wonder so many
have placed such value on the Bible.